Elements of Statistical Machine Learning
Course Description Sheet

Basic information

Degree program
Computer Science (joint program – WI and WEAIiIB)

Specialization
–

Organizational unit
Faculty of Computer Science

Level of study
First-cycle engineering studies

Mode of study
Full-time

Study profile
General academic

Academic year
2025/2026

Course code
WIINFS.Ii8.08694.25

Language of instruction
Polish

Course status
Mandatory

Course block
Major-specific courses

Research-related course
Yes

Course coordinator
Marcin Kurdziel

Instructors
Marcin Kurdziel, Rafał Grzeszczuk

Term
Semester 4

Assessment form
Pass

Teaching format and contact hours
Lecture: 14
Laboratory classes: 14

ECTS credits
3

Course learning objectives

C1
This course is an introduction to the methods and algorithms of statistical machine learning. The core material covers selected models for regression and data classification problems. These will be presented both in the classical framework and in the Bayesian framework. The course is supplemented with an introduction to MC/MCMC methods and so-called probabilistic programming.

Learning outcomes for the course
Code	Learning outcome area	Program learning outcomes	Verification methods
Knowledge – The student knows and understands:
W1	The student has knowledge of Bayesian inference and selected methods for estimating the parameters of learning models.	INF1A_W07	Class activity, oral response, laboratory pass
W2	The student has knowledge of selected machine learning models for regression and data classification problems.	INF1A_W07	Class activity, oral response, laboratory pass
Skills – The student is able to:
U1	The student is able to implement selected statistical machine learning models.	INF1A_U05, INF1A_U07	Completion of laboratory exercises, laboratory pass
U2	The student is familiar with selected libraries useful for implementing statistical machine learning methods.	INF1A_U05, INF1A_U07	Completion of laboratory exercises, laboratory pass
U3	The student is able to train selected statistical machine learning models and evaluate their effectiveness.	INF1A_U05, INF1A_U07	Completion of laboratory exercises, laboratory pass
Curriculum content ensuring the achievement of the learning outcomes for the module

This course is an introduction to the methods and algorithms of statistical machine learning. The core material covers selected models for regression and data classification problems. These will be presented both in the classical framework and in the Bayesian framework. The course is supplemented with an introduction to MC/MCMC methods and so-called probabilistic programming.

Student workload
Type of student activity	Average number of hours* devoted to completed activities
Lecture	14
Laboratory classes	14
Preparation for classes	25
Independent study of course topics	25
Additional contact hours	5
Exam or final test	2

Total student workload
Number of hours: 85

Number of contact hours
Number of hours: 28

* one class hour means 45 minutes

Curriculum content
No.	Curriculum content	Course learning outcomes	Teaching format
1.	Frequentist and Bayesian interpretation of probability. Bayes’ theorem. Likelihood, prior distribution, and posterior distribution. Bayesian inference. The concept of a conjugate distribution. Example: the Beta-binomial model. (2h) Multivariate normal distribution and its properties. Parameterization: mean value and covariance matrix. Joint, marginal, and conditional distribution of normal variables. Linear Gaussian models. (2h) Linear models for regression problems. Linear regression in the classical approach (MLE). Bayesian linear regression. (2h) Introduction to Gaussian processes. Gaussian process regression. (2h) Linear models for classification problems. Logistic regression and multiclass logistic regression. MLE estimator for logistic regression. Stochastic gradient descent. (2h) Monte Carlo methods in Bayesian inference. Sampling algorithms. MC methods: importance sampling. Monte Carlo parameter estimation. (2h) MCMC methods: Metropolis–Hastings. Hierarchical Bayesian models. Generative model for observations. Probabilistic programming. (2h)	W1, W2	Lecture
2.	Introduction to computational packages in Python. (2h) Multivariate normal distribution and linear Gaussian models. (2h) – Linear Gaussian model for the problem of estimating an object’s position. Linear regression. (2h) – Implementation of classical linear regression with the MLE estimator. – Implementation of Bayesian linear regression. Gaussian processes. (2h) – Implementation of Gaussian process regression. Logistic regression. (2h) – Implementation of multiclass logistic regression for images of handwritten digits. Inference using Monte Carlo methods. (2h) – Introduction to the TensorFlow Probability package. – Implementation of the Importance Sampling algorithm. Probabilistic programming in TensorFlow Probability. (2h) – Development of a generative model for a selected observation dataset. – Estimation of the parameters of the developed model and inference regarding the stated hypotheses about the observations.	U1, U2, U3	Laboratory classes
Extended information

Teaching methods and techniques:
Laboratory classes, lecture

Type of classes	Assessment methods	Course passing requirements
Lecture	Class activity, oral response, laboratory pass	Passing the course requires obtaining a positive grade in laboratory classes.
Laboratory classes	Completion of laboratory exercises, laboratory pass	Passing the course requires obtaining a positive grade in laboratory classes.
Additional description

Lectures for this course will be conducted remotely using the Webex/Teams platform.

All other classes will take place in classrooms. This also applies to assessments and exams held during examination sessions.

Conditions and method of passing individual class components, including resit rules, as well as conditions for admission to the exam
A condition for passing the laboratory classes is attendance and obtaining a grade of at least 3.0 in each laboratory.
Additional quizzes may be conducted during laboratory classes to check knowledge of the course material. Passing the laboratory requires passing these quizzes, if they are conducted. A failing grade on a quiz may be improved during the final pass quiz at the end of the semester.
After meeting the passing conditions, the positive laboratory grade is the average of the grades from assignments and quizzes, rounded to the nearest grade provided for in the study regulations.
Final grade calculation
A condition for obtaining a positive final grade is obtaining a positive grade in laboratory classes.
The final grade is the laboratory class grade. A positive final grade may be increased in the case of significant student activity during lectures.
Method and procedure for making up deficiencies resulting from student absence from classes

Deficiencies in completing assignments (arising, for example, from an excused absence) should be made up during subsequent classes.

Prerequisites and additional requirements

Knowledge and skills covered in the course “Probability Theory and Statistics.”

Rules for participation in individual classes, including whether attendance is mandatory

Lecture: Audiovisual recording of the lecture requires the instructor’s consent.

Laboratory classes: Students complete laboratory exercises in accordance with the materials provided by the instructor. Attendance in laboratory classes is mandatory.

Literature

Required

Kevin P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective, MIT Press, 2012

Additional

Christopher M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2007
Research and publications

Publications

M. Jamroż, M. Kurdziel, M. Opala. “A Bayesian nonparametrics view into deep representations.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020): 1440–1450.
K. Grzegorczyk, M. Kurdziel. “Disambiguated Skip-gram model.” In: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2018, pp. 1445–1454, 2018.
P.I. Wójcik, M. Kurdziel. “Training neural networks on high-dimensional data using random projection.” Pattern Analysis and Applications, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10044-018-0697-0
, 2018.
K. Grzegorczyk, M. Kurdziel. “Binary Paragraph Vectors.” In: Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP, ACL 2017, pp. 121–130, 2017.