Operating Systems
Course Description Sheet
Basic Information

Degree program
Computer Science (joint degree program – Faculty of Computer Science and Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Automatics, Computer Science and Biomedical Engineering)

Specialization
–

Organizational unit
Faculty of Computer Science

Level of study
First-cycle engineering studies

Mode of study
Full-time

Study profile
General academic

Academic year
2025/2026

Course code
WIINFS.Ii8.01051.25

Language of instruction
Polish

Course status
Mandatory

Course block
Major-specific courses

Course related to scientific research
Yes

Course coordinator
Leszek Kotulski

Instructor
Leszek Kotulski

Period
Semester 4

Assessment form
Exam

Teaching format and contact hours
Lecture: 28
Laboratory classes: 14

ECTS credits
3

Course learning objectives

C1
To familiarize students with the principles of operating system functioning and methods of their construction.

Learning outcomes for the course
Code	Learning outcomes	Program learning outcomes	Assessment methods
Knowledge – the student knows and understands:			
W1	The student knows and understands the basic concepts of synchronization problems, synchronization mechanisms used, and deadlock prevention and avoidance algorithms.	INF1A_W05	Class activity, test
W2	The student knows and understands the structure and functions of processes and threads, as well as the methods used by the operating system to manage them.	INF1A_W05	Class activity, test
W3	The student knows and understands memory organization schemes and virtual memory in operating systems.	INF1A_W05	Class activity, test
W4	The student knows and understands the basics of using segments for dynamic linking of modules, the dynamic linking process, and the process structure implemented by the operating system.	INF1A_W05	Class activity, test
Skills – the student is able to:			
U1	The student is able to design and implement software using system mechanisms.	INF1A_U07	Completion of laboratory exercises
Curriculum content ensuring achievement of the learning outcomes for the course module

The student has well-structured knowledge of operating systems, their principles of operation, the basic problems related to managing computer system resources, and the algorithms used to solve them.

Student workload
Student activities	Average number of hours devoted to completed activities
Lecture	28
Laboratory classes	14
Independent study of course topics	30
Preparation of project, presentation, written work, report	10
Exam or final test	2
Additional contact hours	5

Total student workload
89 hours

Number of contact hours
42 hours

* one class hour means 45 minutes

Course content
No.	Course content	Course learning outcomes	Teaching forms
1.	1. Basic programming tools, compilation and debugging of programs (g++/gcc, make and gdb) 2. Memory management. Static and dynamic libraries. Useful functions. Time measurement 3. File and directory operations 4. Process creation. Process environment. Process control 5. Inter-process communication: signals 6. Test I. Assignment of mini-project topics and discussion of their scope 7. Inter-process communication: named and unnamed pipes 8. Inter-process communication: message queues (IPC & POSIX) 9. Inter-process communication: semaphores and shared memory (IPC & POSIX) 10. Basics of thread handling – programming interface 11. Synchronization in multithreaded applications 12. Inter-process communication: sockets 13. Test II. Discussion of mini-project topics 14. Mini-project presentations	U1	Laboratory classes
2.	The first two lectures (4 hours) provide a general introduction covering the following topics: • the role and tasks of the operating system, • the place of the operating system (in particular the kernel) in the software structure of a computer system, microkernel architecture, • classification of operating systems (centralized, networked, distributed), • general principle of operating system operation (the way control is passed to the kernel program), • the concepts of process, resource, and thread; user-level threads, kernel threads, lightweight processes, multithreading models. The next lecture (2 hours) concerns processor scheduling, i.e. task scheduling: • discussion of the general concept of scheduling, • preemptive and non-preemptive scheduling algorithms and criteria for their evaluation, • scheduling solutions in modern operating systems, namely traditional UNIX, Linux, and Windows. The next three lectures (6 hours) deal with concurrent processing and process synchronization. Initially, these issues are discussed at the architectural level, without significant support from the operating system (apart from implementing the process concept). This module therefore includes such topics as: the concept of atomic instruction and interleaving, the essence of synchronization, and correctness of concurrent programs (safety and liveness). These concepts are illustrated with sample solutions to the mutual exclusion problem, including Peterson’s algorithm, Lamport’s algorithm, and solutions based on the atomic instructions test&set and exchange. Then synchronization mechanisms supported by the operating system or a high-level programming language are discussed: • semaphores — their classification and implementation, • POSIX mechanisms — mutexes and condition variables, • monitors and critical regions. Examples of the use of these mechanisms are shown in solutions to classic synchronization problems: producer-consumer, readers-writers, dining philosophers, sleeping barbers, and the implementation of a generalized semaphore using binary semaphores. Finally, synchronization mechanisms in distributed environments are discussed: messages, remote procedure/method invocation, and rendezvous. The next lecture (2 hours) is devoted to deadlock — describing the phenomenon itself and discussing methods of counteracting it. The following are presented: the necessary conditions for deadlock in the context of preemptable and non-preemptable resources, the definition of deadlock, description of the system state for deadlock analysis — allocation graph and wait-for graph and their specific properties. As for prevention, the following approaches are discussed: deadlock prevention, deadlock avoidance (including the banker’s algorithm), deadlock detection, and briefly, recovery principles. In the following two lectures (4 hours), memory management issues are discussed. The first module focuses on main memory management, including: memory partitioning, memory allocation, and address translation, especially in paged and segmented memory systems. On this occasion, the phenomena of internal and external fragmentation are discussed, as well as the issues of memory protection and sharing. The second module concerns the implementation of virtual memory (paging and segmentation). Page faults, their handling, and the basic problems associated with them are discussed, i.e. page replacement and instruction restart. Most of the module is devoted to replacement algorithms — their classification, operation, applications, and implementation issues. The next lecture (2 hours) concerns the use of segments during program execution by the operating system, as well as the forms of a program during processing by the compiler/assembler, linker, loader, and program modules. The following lecture (2 hours) discusses module structure, the linker, the static linking process, the loader, the process of loading a program into memory, and the program segment. The modular form of a program in memory, the problem of dynamic linking, internal, resident, and external objects, and methods of dynamic linking are the subject of the next lecture (2 hours). The following lecture (2 hours) covers: • dynamic linking, the execution segment environment of a process, examples of loading modules during execution, the form of the object module in dynamic linking, • file system, structure of files and directories, allocation of disk space. The next lecture (2 hours) covers: • input/output management, • the role of device drivers. The final lecture (2 hours) is a summary lecture.	W1, W2, W3, W4	Lecture
Additional information
Teaching methods and techniques

Laboratory, lecture, distance learning

Type of classes	Assessment methods	Course completion requirements
Lecture	Class activity, test	
Laboratory classes	Completion of laboratory exercises	
Additional description

Lectures for this course will be conducted remotely using the Webex or MS Teams platform. Other classes will take place in classrooms. This also applies to assessments and exams held during examination sessions.

Conditions and method of passing individual class forms, including retake rules, as well as conditions for admission to the exam

In the event of absence from tests, the student is required to complete the relevant material during the final assessment test. A condition for taking the exam is obtaining course credit.

Method of calculating the final grade
To obtain a passing final grade, it is necessary to receive a passing grade from the laboratory component (test) and pass the test/exam from the lecture component.
The arithmetic mean (avg) is calculated from the grades obtained for the laboratory and lecture components, from all sittings.
The final grade is determined according to the following rule:
if avg > 4.75 then final grade = 5.0
else if avg > 4.25 then final grade = 4.5
else if avg > 3.75 then final grade = 4.0
else if avg > 3.25 then final grade = 3.5
else final grade = 3.0
Method and procedure for making up for deficiencies resulting from student absence from classes

Making up for deficiencies resulting from student absence from classes: if a student misses a given class, they may participate in classes with another group. If this is impossible, the student is required to independently make up the material.

Initial and additional requirements

Ability to program in C++ in any system.

Rules for participation in individual classes, including whether attendance is compulsory

Lecture: Students participate in classes, learning subsequent course content in accordance with the course syllabus. Students should ask questions and clarify doubts on an ongoing basis. Audio-visual recording of the lecture requires the instructor’s consent.

Laboratory classes: Students complete laboratory exercises in accordance with materials provided by the instructor. The student is required to prepare for the exercise being performed, which may be verified by an oral or written test. Passing the class is based on presenting a solution to the assigned problem. Passing the module is possible only after completing all laboratory classes.

Literature
Required

Abraham Silberschatz, Peter B. Galvin, Podstawy systemów operacyjnych, WNT, 2005 (6th revised edition);
A. Silberschatz, P.B. Galvin, G. Gagne, Operating System Concepts. Eighth Edition, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2009.

Research and publications
Publications
Kotulski L.: Comments on Implementation of P(s) and V(s) Primitives with the Help of Binary Semaphores. Operating System Review, 1988, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 53–59.
Kotulski L.: About the Semantic Nested Monitor Calls. Sigplan Notice, 1987, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 80–82.
Kotulski L.: Time Dependent Errors Exclusion Method in Monitor Structures. Universitas Iagellonica Acta Scientiarum Litterarumque, Schedae Informaticae, 1987, vol. 3, pp. 39–47.
Kotulski L.: KOOS – a support system for the implementation of specialized operating systems on the Odra 1305 machine. Universitas Iagellonica Acta Scientiarum Litterarumque, Schedae Informaticae, 1985, vol. 1, pp. 61–79.
Probabilistic anomaly detection using analysis of system calls / Paweł Król, Przemysław Maciołek, Jarosław Koźlak // Informatyka Teoretyczna i Stosowana = Computer Science / Częstochowa University of Technology, Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science; ISSN 1643-2355. — 2006, vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 243–255.
Probabilistic anomaly detection based on system calls analysis — Probabilistyczne rozpoznawanie anomalii bazujące na analizie wywołań systemowych / Przemysław Maciołek, Paweł Król, Jarosław Koźlak // Computer Science: Yearbook of the AGH University of Science and Technology named after Stanisław Staszic in Kraków; ISSN 1508-2806. — 2007, vol. 8, special edition, pp. 93–108.